I get the impression that everything is
an evolution of Stardust which makes me
wonder what does future Evolution hold
it is the richness of the chemistry that
the periodic table of elements grants us
far as I can tell it knows no bounds the
water molecule H2O you break it apart
the hydrogen joins something else the
oxygen joins somebody else you Brea in
oxygen atoms that were exported by a
star 5 billion years ago feel it
feel that connectivity feel the burn
feel the
burn this is Star Talk y degrass Tyson
here your personal astrophysicist today
we're doing Cosmic query's grab bag
Edition and I've got co-host here Paul
mrio Paul welcome back great to see you
oh love your work man yeah I see you on
the on The Late
Show when I the occasions when I'm on I
see you warming up the crowd but
occasionally gives you a slot in oh yeah
I'm I've been on a bunch of times and
I'm going to be going on again uh uh
very soon okay we for you for you always
great and you got there's a there's like
a a Broadway show or or or a stage yeah
show permission to speak and we all know
your podcast yeah inside out with Paul
mrio inside out with Paul mrio and
you're you're on it I think I've been on
that a couple times absolutely yeah I
still owe your money for that so there's
no categories here there's no categories
this is loose but I got to tell
you we got tons of and they're all good
and they're varied and they're from
people over all over the country and all
over the world in different age ranges
which you'll see in so it's really cool
uh so this is maneno Cheno from the US
OFA had the SSC in Texas gone through
where would we be today do canceled
projects like this set us back as a
species also what other major scientific
breakthroughs have been made or halted
oh made or halted I like that sounds
like he's digging yeah so the SSC the
super conducting super collider MH which
was had I been in charge of naming it I
would called it the super duper collider
I was going to
say I think it needs more adjectives
that's I know the gargantuan super they
ran out of adjectives there oh my God
honey look at the size of this
collider yeah so they missed out on that
one I thought if you take certain metals
and you reduce their temperature there
comes a point where they become super
conducting where electricity can pass
through them and there's no resistance
and they don't get hot and it just moves
we call that super conductivity in the
1970s and 80s there was Research into
can we make superconducting
materials at a higher temperature in
other words as you lower the temperature
of the material can it become
superconducting at a much higher
temperature than previously enabled why
is that important to seek it at a higher
temperature because if you can find a
room temperature superconductor oh oh
that would transform everything yeah but
then every average person is going to
have it and then we're going to have all
these people with super conduct and all
a sudden people are going to be turned
into like little ants like Ant-Man what
are you people crazy is that how he
became an ant you guys can't put Power
like that in the okay that's a very good
point you want to meet my brother-in-law
you don't want that
should have some guard rails right so it
came of age when higher temperature
superconducting materials were becoming
available and why is that matter for any
collider you're accelerating particles
the particles have electric charge and
if you move an electric charge through a
magnetic field you can accelerate it
okay and you you adjust the magnetic
field make it make it just right it can
get very very fast the particles can go
very fast hitting 99% the speed of what
the man estation of that very fast
moving particles look like is just is
that the is that it's just a beam of
particles like typically protons and you
slam it into a Target okay and that
creates an a field of energy out of
which brand new particles conform and we
harness that energy no no it's not for
energy it's for what new particles exist
in this universe that we didn't know
about before we turn on the switch oh we
have enough particles why do we need new
particles because you always want more
particles come on what do you what are
you doing with the new particle we need
more because a new particle might
explain something we didn't understand
oh okay so you're constantly in Str yeah
yeah it's like what we were talking
about on another show so you never
Universe yeah they never rest so it came
of age at that time and by the way it's
still the Cold War early 90s so under
Reagan we say yes let's start this
project super conducting super Collide
they dig the Hole by the way it's be the
largest and most powerful super collider
in the world you a whole yeah it's like
I forgot the diamer couple hundred miles
I mean huge yeah it's the metaland they
some states are not large enough to
contain this collider such as Rhode
Island all right which is where I'm from
you're from Rhode Island that's my home
state you can't can can the world stop
making any small reference and compare
it to Rhode Island can we all move on
from that if I hear blankety blank twice
the size of Rhode Island I'm going to
create my own Super collider and zap you
okay I didn't know it was that
sensitive Rhode Islanders carry yes
there issues we have size issues you
have issues okay so Tex is clearly big
enough so it's in waxah haty Texas okay
they acquired the land started digging
the hole right and the years go by and
around 1989
1990 the government takes another look
at the the Contracting the budgets and
they judge that there're cost overruns
that we cannot
afford and they zero the
project that's different from cancelling
it from what I read the project that was
fairly far along yes it was yes it was
the research the engineering and then
they zeroed the
project and once that happened the
center of mass of particle
physics would no longer be in the United
States but just cuz you don't do it
doesn't mean some other folks can't or
won't right and the European Center for
nuclear research CERN which located in
Switzerland but it's a European
Consortium an international Consortium I
should say uh they said all right you're
not going to do it we're going to do it
so then they built as part of their
facility the Large Hadron Collider you
might have heard of that the LHC mhm
that became the detector that found the
mythical higs boson the God particle the
particle whose field grants Mass to
other particles that's badass if you're
going to be a particle that's the
particle you want to be you want to be
there's a book called the God particle
written about the higs boson that was
written decades ago because we knew that
should be there we don't have a an
accelerator that can detect the energies
where we would find it so and that's the
particle that kills the its brother the
other particle who who thinks he's
cheating he he's a he's he's Fredo he
kills his brother Fredo oh I'm sorry I
got this mixed up with the Godfather go
ahead continue I'm
a so so in all seriousness why couldn't
the commun the scientific community in
America convince the federal government
and the people funding this that this
was a mistake because they didn't call
it a super duper
collider that's my answer those idiots
those idiots would have understood the
significance okay so watch there is a
report that talks about the budget that
we can't afford it I have a different
view no time in the 20th century when we
had the power to make particle
accelerators did anyone complain if
there were cost overruns you don't even
know if there were cost overruns maybe
there were no cost overruns I didn't
check the budget on every single
particle accelerator in the country in
the 20th century there's Brook Haven
there's Stanford linear accelerator
there's there's there's all m part
there's uh in outside of Chicago fmy
Labs okay all over the country and
they're all under the aaces of the
Department of energy by the way so a
budget serves this all right this gets
cancelled wait a
minute what else happened in
1989 um Peace broke out in Europe yeah
peace broke out right the the wall the
the the Berlin Wall came down and within
three years four years the Soviet Union
was
designed oh there was cost overruns we
can't divor politics if you're
threatened with your life and your way
of living right there are no cost over
runs it's not and how can
and that's exactly right okay I don't
mean to I'd be blunt about it okay so
here's a blank check keep me alive keep
me alive yes yes keep me alive and by
the and by the way very clever to put it
under the aices of the Department of
energy instead of the dod so that it can
look like it looks like just a science
project that we don't our energy out
correct correct but 20th century was the
century of the physicist yeah from
beginning to end yeah all the way
through yeah and no Cold War uh oh by
the way uh President Clinton comes in in
the 1990s and it's the first time that
anybody remembers the budget is balanced
for the United States and so they they
want to take credit for balancing the
budget except there's no cold war
anymore okay so he he takes office
there's no cold war so yeah let's be
real about budgets right all right let's
understand this right and I WR about
this it's speculative there's no
document that says this the document
says cost overruns we're zeroing the
budget we have other priorities there's
others that said that when the space
station was coming online the space
station would be primarily served
through NASA's Houston uh NASA Houston
right okay the the the the Johnson Space
Center others declared that the politics
of it were you can't have two major
projects in the same state that would
get that much attention from the
government yeah but you can move one to
another state no you can't move the the
the the hole in the ground the
accelerator move the other no no Johnson
Space Center you can't move that what
did the FL do to Florida no Florida
already has a Space Center but that's
not where the astronaut kind of negative
thinking that kept the super duper
collider from existing in Florida Space
Center they don't train the astronauts
there the astronuts are trained in
Houston n has 10 centers strategically
put all right this is listen my friend
you just said it a minute ago if we were
on the verge of a brink of War they find
a way overun they're both both of those
programs to exist so I I wrote about
this in my book from a few years ago
when was it 2017 mhm um accessory to War
the unspoken alliance between
astrophysics and the military and I talk
about this two-way street between the
frontier of modern astrophysics particle
physics in there as well because
particles we learn about the big bang
and the needs of the military so that
became the most obvious accounting for
that to occur we lose the the center of
mass it goes to Europe uh Europe
eventually discovers the higs Boson mhm
Nobel prizes all around mhm our
accelerator was depending on the the the
beam 3 to six times more powerful than
the most powerful settings of the
LHC so we would have discovered the higs
BOS on decades ago and perhaps either at
that time or in in the resulting decades
other things because oh thank you other
things perhaps other things but once you
get there now you ask the next questions
it's a new place to stand and you have a
prum
El exactly it's never about the question
you even know to ask it's the question
you haven't thought of yet because
there's a place you will soon stand that
will give you a view that you didn't
even know is possible and based on that
perspective the setback is almost
exponential in a way right because we
don't know what we don't know and that's
the shame you don't know what you don't
know correct and that's deep and
important and real uh they're trying to
boost the energies of the LHC to go to
the next level there so that was getting
back to the specifics of the question
the discovery of the higs BOS on was
delayed decades because of that decision
but science is science it's not about
the creativity of an individual if
Beethoven did not compose The Ninth
Symphony if van go did not paint the
star night no one who will ever be born
in the future will compose or paint that
right whereas in science you can be very
creative and be ahead of everybody but
eventually everybody catches up and we
move Beyond it
because what decides what is true is not
the Public's voting on oh we like your
artwork it's nature which is the
ultimate judge jury and executioner of
your idea and if you don't want to do
the United States another country does
it cons by the way it's International so
we had Americans who were part of that
collaboration but we didn't lead it
right that's all yeah and I'm I'm
American
Amer I'm a 20th century American when we
let everything and now I'm gonna what
you what you got over there guy can I
look over the fence I had that we almost
had that it's like it's like you're
looking over the fence and your
neighbors got an inground pool youve got
an above ground yeah where the the
America's a country when it comes to
that with the above ground pool well
that was a great question tremendous
answer I was a long answer but it no
great hey Star Talk fans I don't know if
you know this but the audio version of
the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that and Spotify an apple podcast
and most other podcast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic on Star Talk this I love
this person this is uh rupesh hi my name
is crti I am 11 years old I'm in the
sixth grade I live in Carri North
Carolina in my school we are doing a
passion project and my topic is
astrophysics as I find this topic very
interesting I have also recently been
reading 11 years old this I know right
been reading no no you lying it's not 22
or okay okay fine it says I know how to
read I've also been reading your book
astrophysics for young people in a hurry
by the way could you come up with a
longer title Jesus I have a question for
you and I love if you could answer it
for me as that question would be added
into my project plus your answer so
speaking of Truth this kid's asking you
to help her cheat is a question very
basic what existed before the big bang
oh I can answer
that you can really yeah yes okay go
ahead we had no
idea okay next question this is why
people find scientists annoying we want
some generalize everybody else just cuz
you we lost some definitive answers in
our life just cuz in this moment you
find I can answer it me annoying here's
I got two two things that existed before
the Big Bang ready yeah lint maybe and a
single sock it started all with a single
sock FL so that is missing from the
laundry that single sock lost in
floating around in time in time we don't
know for sure and we wouldn't even know
how to experimentally verify our ideas
but there are some ideas and when you
run the equations back through time of
general relativity I and quantum physics
by the way we are in the Centennial
decade of the discovery of most of the
important tenets in quantum physics so I
feel it gives me yeah Goosebumps
actually and not only that that's the
decade where Edwin Hubble Hubble was a
person before before a telescope that
didn't
work it works now was he as defective as
a person as he was as a telescope Mama
didn't think that
so so in in the mid 19 20s right he
discovers that the spiral fuzzy things
in the night sky spiral nebula were
whole other galaxies like the Milky Way
this is freaky was there speculation as
to what it was before he just just just
spiral clouds yeah there were other
fuzzy clouds that weren't spiral so
there were like but there were
telescopes that existed before his no
but you have know the distance to things
you can't just Pace It Out by walking it
all right if you find the distance a
spiral nebula and it's a 100 times
farther away than other nebula than this
sitting outside of your Galaxy right all
right and so that he discovered that in
mid decade and then by the end of the
decade he discovers the expanding
universe that that
1920s Roaring 20s right before the
market crashed in October 1929 and then
you know people weren't so focused on
science unfortunately it's like the
science of eating
having food on your plate when you run
the equations back you generate this
entity that pumps out universes possibly
an infinite number of universes it just
pumps them out and we call that the
Multiverse a term that's just been
uptook by by Marvel
Comics and and not only Marvel but of
course Rick and Morty right with all of
these Brilliant Minds out there over the
years why have
what do you what is your theory as to
what's keeping us from knowing what
existed before the Big Bang we've been
figure out other things like the origin
of the earth and the origin of the moon
and the origin of stars and the origin
of and now we're on the origin of
galaxies so the origin of the give us a
chance here of top people working yeah
but you're avoiding the question like
like I'm having an argument with my wife
you're avoiding the question stop what
I'm saying is
science is more about knowing what
question to ask
than to have an answer for every
question posed Isaac Newton my man H my
little finger puppet of him here next to
my Voodoo thing I don't even know what
that that showed up in my office one day
I don't know where it came from that is
a little creepy yeah I don't I have no
this was just in my I don't even know
where where it came from things got to
put some weight
on a little malnourished sit him there
Isaac Newton in his book Optics
published 1704 wrote it in English so
that like regular people could could
read it not in the academic language
Latin for Scholars uh at the end of his
book he has a section called queries by
the way that's where I get the word
Cosmic queries not called Cosmic
questions that was which would also kind
of work you get the alliteration but
Cosmic queries he has a section in the
back called queries yeah this is just
stuff that spilled off his his dinner
plate one of them is I wonder if the
stars of the night sky are just like the
sun
except much much farther away wow yeah
wow okay yeah and that's like a scrap on
off the D plate and and this is the guy
who utters this line I'll mangle it only
a little he says sometimes I
feel like a
child sitting on a
shoreline picking up one Pebble for
being shinier than another
when an ocean of undiscovered truths lay
before me
wow so it's Newton saying that my man so
anyhow so the the uh Multiverse is there
for what might have been around before
the Big Bang and there but that just
moves the question back you know what
where did the Multiverse come from yeah
it just keeps going that plagues Origins
questions right um and by the way it
somehow doesn't plague religious people
well I was just going to say it it it's
sort of we're not even talking about the
theory that God created everything and
there is it's not science well it's not
Theory it's faith that says that so I so
what intrigues me is when I say well I
don't know was around before the big
something had to be there something I we
got top people working on it we're give
us a chance it had to be God
then I said maybe the universe always
was no it to have a beginning and so
okay well so what do you say well it was
God and so then I say well who created
God oh God always was God was always
there so they allow that within
themselves right to say God always was
but won't allow the scientist to say may
maybe the universe always was apparently
that's not allowed right but it's
allowed when you're religious and you
say that about God so all I'm saying is
the origins questions will always be
able to push it Forward Unless somehow
it creates itself and then you have a
loop right and but we're not there yet
it's a frontier right give me some more
yeah you got it grab bag me some more
yeah this is Umar Chima Umar from
Seattle longtime Star Talk listener I
finally decided to get off my cheap ass
and become a
patron I love that yeah thank you Omar
for getting off your okay save your
money cuz t-shirts are coming patreon
saints patreon Saints here first
question we know that we can slow down
our time relative to others by traveling
at a super high speed or getting very
close to a massive object in space but
is there a way to accelerate our time
instead of slowing it down can we
accelerate our time and essentially
visit the past or does it just mean we
just get old super fast and if anybody
knows about getting
old see I'm proud of my age I you should
I'd like to believe that I have wisdom
to show for it you do that's
all P I don't want to get old I don't
want to get old yeah because they're not
learning new things exactly they're
stuck in some previous time in their
lives where they wish they were still on
the football team or on the still on the
cheerleading squad when speaking of
which that's why I don't want to go back
to the past because I'm not g to ever
win that 50 yard dash and then embarrass
myself I couldn't get Mary Ferguson go
to the prom with me don't get me started
okay yeah we have issues you're bringing
to the show you got to leave those in
therapy I can't this is why I'm here I
need you so can so can we accelerate our
time and visit the past I think you have
to look at it differently the guy's a
paying customer he can look at it any
way he wants that's true customer's
always right okay you're right whatever
you're thinking you're right just keep
sending the money people come on send
the money you shouldn't look at it that
way you should look at it as your speed
as seen by others by the way you don't
feel this at all it's only as measured
by others so if you go fast and time
slows down for you you're still ticking
to you it's 1 second per second to
everybody else it's 1 second per 10
minutes 1 second per hour I'm not
following to explain it it's how is it
observable by others my speed if I see
you oh so I'm here and I see you whisby
at some speed okay see you walk down the
hall well I was thinking of rocket ship
but sure okay all right go rocket sh
okay walk down the hall at half the
speed of light
okay which I can all right I have an
equation a formula that tells me the
rate at which your time is ticking
relative to me and I plug it in and I
forgot the number it might be ticking a
third or a fourth my time is different
than yours because you're stationary and
this thing is moving now I that's almost
the right way to say it your time is
different from me because we are moving
relative to each
other as far as you're concerned you are
stationary and I'm moving past you at
half the speed of
light uh we don't know right so you will
look at me and say oh he's moving slow
and I look at you say oh you're moving
slow both of us will measure the same
thing about each other if we are passing
each other in the night at half the
speed of light one going One Direction
we're going correct and so why is half
the speed of light a critical it's not I
could say 10% but it's it's not linear
so the the the faster you go relative to
the speed of light the greater and
greater the effects are all right so
half the speed of light is not half the
effects okay it's a it's a small
fraction and it grows rapidly okay all
right it goes at like the square of your
velocity as you get closer how do I make
your time go slower if you're going half
the speed of light I make you go faster
now you go three4 of the speed of light
90% the speed of light and I can watch
you slow down relative to me how do I
speed you up go slower go 1/4 the speed
of light one/ tenth the speed of light
how slow can I get your time to go stop
right in front of me and that is the
slowest we can make your time go which
is the same time that and that happens
to match my time correct but do this
they want to go backwards we don't know
how to do that we because I have to
repeat my my time
poem please if I may please we are
prisoners of the present forever
transitioning between our inaccessible
past and our unknowable future that's
exactly what I say to my wife when she
asked if I bought pickles and I forgot
you know you're bringing your issues
into well you make it very relatable to
my life okay and I have a lot of issues
and you know I love you man I love
you so the answer is it's not your fault
it's not your fault but there's this
Obsession in pop culture with this time
travel you want to go backwards in time
and do you think we do you just think
and I know never say absolutes but like
why it's dangerous because you start
flirting with the past and you alter the
future whatever well you you can flirt
with your own future so if you went in
the past what would you change uh you
have to watch out for that because you
don't know the full set of contingencies
that would follow okay who cares about
anybody no they don't because say if you
if you go in the past and there's Hitler
as a child will you kill Hitler as a
child would you do that what you don't
know is there's someone else that would
rise up that would have been worse than
him for the stability of the world in
the 1930s and 40s you don't know that
right I'm keeping the past the way it is
uh not knowing whether having altered it
by the way this was explored in an
episode of Star Trek they went back in
time to the 1930s or late 30s I forgot
the exact year and Bones I think it was
Bones the the the surgeon falls in love
with a woman you're not supposed to do
that because they're they're there
you're messing with you're messing with
the time the SpaceTime Continuum but as
usual men led by their whatever that's a
scientific fact that is a scientific
fact
go ahead no on that subject by the way
the first interracial K kiss between a
black person and white person was on
Star Trek and it was William Shatner oh
I remember that it was it was kissing uh
Lieutenant Aur I remember that okay they
got all kinds of hate mail from the
south on that they could it was 1967
somewhere around there meanwhile Captain
Kirk can visit all these galaxies
there's a green woman a blue woman she's
got she a tumor over here a horn over
here kiss them the clearly female aliens
he's kissing all up in them but another
human who has skin he's kissing a woman
that's looks like a ker that's fine but
not that black woman damn it we have
standards uh bones falls in love with
this woman and she's a peace she's into
peace she doesn't want war she sees
Nations building up and she tries to
prevent the start of the second world
war this is her motive and her Mission
meanwhile she gets hit by a bus or a
truck and dies and Bones is distraught
he wants to go back in time again
prevent to prevent that to save her they
go back in time again and that's when
Spock does his research he realizes she
has to die because if she lives she will
successfully delay the entry of the
United States into the second world war
giving Germany Nazi Germany the leg up
in creating the atom bomb and they
create the atom bomb first and take over
the world and this is communicated to
bones and the scene where she's going
out into the street and the truck is
coming he wants to save her and they and
and Kirk and and they hold them back
yeah and they just watch her die yeah
because that's a different world that
they don't want to have happen right so
stay in the present get your ass out of
the past okay okay that sounds good by
the way Hawking has a time travel
conjecture where he says he thinks that
as we get closer to traveling through
time there'll be some new law of physics
that we will discover that will prevent
it on the subject of Star Trek can you
explain to me why when they transport
Kirk his shirt never fits prop they
can't make it so it's a little bigger
it's like he went to the baby Star Trek
Store because it fits tightly because he
had a he was a buff body back then I
understand but yeah not by today's
standards but back then he was plus plus
if I of all the captains he's the
captain I'd want to be why because the
pointy sideburns I did have I did give
myself pointing sideburns in my day but
he took on all his own
fights that that that's
music you remember that yes yes yes so
the point is if you're a crew member and
your captain is fighting the bad guy
right you're going to fight the bad guy
right you're not be
lard and say go fight them it's no get
your own ass out
there F I don't want the guy leading to
get in a fight and die likeing he's got
phasers don't worry about I'd be like
hey guy you I got to stay back here no
he's got phers we good yeah but he's got
all the change to put in the meter when
he's parking the chip in the middle of
the thing you don't know what you're
talking about um I I I think he does
have a good body I'll give you that in
the day that was a good body okay you
think the transporter should have had a
tailor yes he shows up looking da
exactly yeah with a juny hat a cane come
on that's a different transporter that's
a more expensive transporter the one
that's also your tailor okay you ever
wanted one of your questions on the
universe answered we all have questions
about the universe black holes to
quazars quantum entanglement wormholes
there is no end to the depths of cosmic
C awesome well the entry level of
patreon membership with Star Talk gets
you just that I think it starts at $5 a
month you have access to the question
line that reaches our Cosmic query
programming and not only that we produce
a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of
the Hayden planetarium what you think
you would be doing what okay but this
had to be another Universe it wouldn't
happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd
be a a songwriter for Broadway musicals
o so that's the entry level and the
perks ascend from there uh there's a
level in fact where we send you a an
autographed copy of one of my latest
books uh right now it's Star Messenger
Cosmic perspectives on civilization and
it's signed with my fancy fountain pen
with purple ink so I invite you to just
check the link below and all of that
money goes to our ability to experiment
with new ways of bringing the universe
down to earth so thank you for those who
have already joined and we welcome
others to participate in this Grand
Adventure of what it is to bring the
universe down to earth as always keep
looking up Emily connect Reynolds hello
Neil this is Emily in Koto nice yeah is
there Stardust in the air we breathe or
is the stuff in the air that air is made
of just an evolution of Stardust I get
the impression that everything is an
evolution of Stardust which makes me
wonder what does future Evolution hold
and I can tell you future Evolution
there will be a time when humans don't
have to bend over to put their shoes on
it's called SK
future is this where we are now that we
have shoes that people can't bend over
to put their shoes it Sketcher a sponsor
I am so annoyed by this is this where we
are now well okay we invented automobil
I can't go all the way down there and
flight and supersonic transport and we
went to the moon and this generation
makes right I don't have to bend over
three feet and I could put more weight
on I think the Baby Boomers are getting
older but they've always been inventive
because we went to the Moon Under the
baby boomer watch right so we're making
our lives easier making it seem like
it's better for everyone but it's really
just for ourselves okay okay all right
because we can't bend over exactly all
right so I get the impression that
everything is an evolution Stardust
which makes me wonder what does future
Evolution hold now this is evolution
could be Astron Astro in the context of
astrophysics or biological evolution all
right so allow me to clarify a couple of
things I speak
glibly that we are not
only poetically but literally
Stardust we are made of
ingredients that were forged in the
hearts of stars not All Stars this kind
of stars that in their end of their
lives explode and become supern noi
scattering their enriched guts across
the
Galaxy I was going to say contaminating
enriching other gas clouds with the
ingredients of life itself carbon nitr n
oxygen go all down the periodic table
right to iron these are particles that
are smaller than the diameter pair atoms
they're atoms okay so I've Loosely
called it dust because these atoms
gather and they make larger
molecules dust has a specific definition
in space we speak of dust in space so
dust are agglomerations of molecules
that are stuck together but are not
chemically connected you could pull
apart the dust to get raw molecules you
pull apart the molecules to get ATS I'm
saying the foundations of this are
elements on the periodic table and I
call Loosely call all of that dust so if
you inhale dust from your shelf with a
with a no the the the whiffer
what do you call that thing yeah Swiffer
the whiffer poer scooper they
want to mix those two up the whiff and
poofers those
areir oh the whiff and poofs are the
Yale po
CL okay the Swiffer if you hire the Yale
Glee Club to dust your house and dust is
generated go ahead the Swiff and poofers
the Swiff so if you so if there's dust
and you inhale it yeah that's like
household dust right which commonly is
like pet dander and other things um yes
if you get to the bottom of that
ultimately those ingredients came from
stars and from the origin of the
universe so it's not an evolution of
dust so much as dust taking on other
shapes so when I say we're made of
Stardust the actual dust from Stars has
been processed here on Earth M but it's
still the same ingredients the nitrogen
oxygen carbon right and so if I were to
be
more sort of chemically accurate in my
discussion of dust uh that changes the
whole conversation Hannah Holmes wrote
The Secret Life of dust from the cosmos
to the kitchen table great title a
former science editor with the I think
the LA times but anyhow so so dust is is
everywhere you know but I rather than
look at dust and say this this is cat
dander and this is from sawdust i i as a
as a
cosmologist
cosmetologist as an
astrophysicist It's All Star dest to me
and and so is and in that famous song
was it by Kansas all we are our d the
wind and he says all we are it says
that's what we are but but but this
human being that I am is Stardust I the
is you are traceable to Stars okay and
to me that's a stardust memory so that I
back to the question from Emily I get
the impression that everything is an
evolution of Stardust which makes me
wonder which is fair that's very fair so
that her question is what does future
Evolution hold based on this Foundation
of Stardust that we just talked about it
is the richness of the chemistry that
the periodic table of elements grants us
got it and it far as I can tell it knows
no
bounds that's the beauty of science if
you the water molecule H2O you break it
apart the hydrogen joins something else
the oxygen joins somebody else and there
the universe progresses unless it finds
itself in in a like a a nuclear furnace
and then it'll become can become another
element right but but absent that right
you're breathing oxygen atoms that were
exported by a star five billion years
ago yeah feel
it feel that connectivity feel the burn
feel the burn feel I think that's all
the time we have unless you have a
really fast one it's a really fast one
and I'll give it a sound bite answer go
okay really fast uh while a St staple
this is Sparkman while it's a staple
it's Sparkman spar got while it's a
staple of mathematics such as calculus
are there any instances of infinity in
the observable universe o i well the
universe the universe itself might be
yes I have it Neil explaining anything
how long it takes to that's ultimate
definition of infinity good night
everybody I'll be here all week I don't
get no respect I try to that it's a
great question though seriously so the
universe is s might be infinite if
there's a Multiverse it's pumping out an
infinite number of universes which in
each each of which could be infinite of
it in in its own dimensionality so for
example I can have a sheet of paper that
goes to Infinity in every direction but
then have another sheet of paper
floating above it that also goes to
infinity and they don't intersect
because they can go like this yeah
because they they coexist but in a
higher Dimension than either of them
each sheet of paper is only in two
Dimensions AR magnetic forces pulling
them together in some way it could be or
even gravitational forces and if you
have two universes that Collide oh
you're talking about on Earth the two
actual sheets of paper I'm talking about
two universes that are infinite but not
colliding with each other if you embed
them in a higher Dimension you can get
away with that as you would with two
sheets of paper that's all I'm saying
there are people top people wondering if
there's a parallel universe might we
feel something of them of their gravity
is there something is there some leakage
out of their SpaceTime that we might
feel that could be the future of
detections of parallel universes of the
infinite universes but my favorite
example of infinity is Zeno's Paradox
where you want to exit the door you got
to go
halfway then you got to go another
halfway and then another
halfway you just keep doing that oh wait
when I walk through the door I walk
through the door no you're going halfway
first and then you're going halfway
again here's the door here's me how am I
going halfway I walk through the door
and don't stop okay you're being too
rational here you got to stay with the
math okay you want to exit the front
door before you get to the door you have
to cross the halfway point don't
you halfway point of what between where
you happen to be standing and where the
door is yes we agree okay okay now you
got to cross the halfway point between
there and the door okay I got you and
then the half and the half and the half
so Random to pick half you could say I
got to pass the third the point at the
one/ third point one third one I could
have that's correct okay all right but
so there's an infinite number of halfway
points yes I get it and Zeno saw this
and said by that reasoning you'll never
get to the door because it's an infinite
but of course you do get to the door so
what's going on and what he didn't
realize is that you are covering more
and more halfway points in less and less
time and the infinity actually converges
to a finite amount of time right because
you're cutting down the distance to
correct right and Infinity can be cut be
cut into something that's finite so yeah
but other than math no I mean the
universe is finite to to our observable
Edge all right so there's no such thing
as to infinity and
beyond I think that's you just dissed a
book that I co-wrote with my producer no
that you know the title of that book yes
to infinity and beyond yes yes why you
dissing the book no I didn't remember
that actually I'm referencing a Disney
movie do I look that
smart Paul we got to go yeah this has
been great You' fantastic yeah man it's
great to see you man keep us smiling
keep us laughing absolutely all right
and we'll find you on the road
permission to speak my Broadway show
director by Frank Oz palmrio.com for
tickets we're going to be in Dr Philip
mrio Mercurio mecu R iio like the SAT
Word Mercurio there you go this has been
star talks grab bag Cosmic queries from
my office here at the American Museum of
Natural History Paul thanks for coming
in thanks for having me all right as
always I bid you to keep looking up
[Music]